35.

of Mime Manya's wedding. Sid was 6 months older than Manya.


Sonya iz geven asach bai aich? (Sonya was with you a lot?)

Sure.

When her mother came back from the Zaign (breastfeeding), she went back to her mother, didn't she?

Sure. Sonya's father was in the army, so Mime Feige would up and come to us. My mother was a wet nurse, so she took care of Feige's child too. A sister, what could she do? She cared for all of them. She never said no. Father was like that too. What are you supposed to do with orphans?

When father left for America, we were supposed to sell the house and the work-house in order to have enough money to get to America. When everything was sold, Mother saw that she had more than enough money. So what do you do with Mime Esther and Mime Manya? You take them with. They didn't have any money, and she did. Morry tried to warn her that
unexpected things could happen along the way; that she had to take Sherman into account. If they were my children, would I leave them behind? Should I leave Sherman behind? So she took them along. Mime Esther had two children, a boy and a girl. Mime Mane had no children. So they all left for America, and we were turned back.

Sonya's mother didn't come; she died there. Sonya went with Sid, at the time the revolution started. At that time, you didn't need passes and you didn't need visas. You simply sat down on the train and went. If the train went, you went. If not, you waited till they brought a caboose. We actually did have papers, but they were taken from us.

We used to get letters from Father's sister, and when Isaac went, he went to her. He didn't know anyone else. He was 18 at the time. When she died, and the children married, there was no point him remaining there, and he went to Winnipeg. He had many friends in Winnipeg, and there he found himself partners. They treated him well, and business was very good. Then Father came, and joined the partnership. Morry wasn't there; he was with us. When they turned us back, Morry stayed with us. We returned to the town where Mime Chaya Feige, Sonya's mother, lived.

Father used to send us money - every month 50 kerblach. In those days, you could live a whole month on 50 kerblach. That was $100 American or