40

It was unbelievable! Such a Smart man. He came to the Rabbi, and said he
was going to America. He asked for advice, what should he do there? Build
houses, is what the Rabbi told him. He had no mone, what was he going to
build houses with? He borrowed money - everybody trusted him. A Jew with
a grey beard; he would build and return the money. He built a block, a
three-storey building near his own house. That way he built afew houses,
and dy made a living from renting them out.

And after the war, when new-comers were arriving in Winnipeg, with
nothing, they would come to Old Cohen - Cohen Columbus. A baker came to
him, saying he had no money to get started. "Go and ask for flour, say
that I sent you, and they will give you the flour on credit, on my
account. After you bake and sell the bread, you can return the money. And
he wasn't the only one that he helped. There weren't many Jews in Winnipeg
at the time. He was one of the first, so they called him Cohen Columbus.

One day, your father - he was about 14 at the time - was on his way to
work, making cigarettes. He saw a Jew walking and talkind to himself.
"If I knew where there were Jews, I would go and talk to them." And _ your
father, who was by no means a bad person, approached and asked him where
he was from. He offered to take him home to his parent's house, but the
man said he was waiting for his brother who had come a day earlier, and he
didn't know where he was. Your father took him home, and while his mother
was preparing breakfast, the man who had come a day earlier came down from
upstairs. It was the brother. When we were married, he came to see if I
was good enough for your father. Those’ two brothers were your friend
Zuriel's gramdfather's brothers. (Ma thought one of them was Abba's
granfather, but Abba says his grandfather died before reaching America.)

Your father helped everybody he could, and your grandfather was like that,

too.

When they got married, Sonya wanted everything right at the start. SHe and
Abie wanted a piano, so he went and arranged for them to get it on
payments. When they didn't keep up the payments, the piano was reclaimed,
and they were angry. My father pointed out to them that Pa's father had
done them a favor, but that they had to make the payments.
