7.

How did Sid get away?

Well, he was a barber. He learned the trade. He'll come here, what will he do? He'll be a barber, so he'll have something to do. And he was short; he couldn't reach the people to give the haircuts so he was standing on a chair. But he was a good barber, and all the big shots that were officers before the trouble, the revolution, they liked him and went to him for haircuts. Then he started working on them - he wants to go to America. How can you fix it for me to go? So they told him - Come, we'll get you onto the train, and you'll go. They actually gave him a pass, a pass he should be able to get to the border. After the border, he would be clear. So that's how he went. He came back - it didn't take him as long as it took us. He didn't travel alone, he went with Mime Manya, and with Sonya. (Esther went earlier, not Manya?)

Eizik had sent money to Sonya from America. In those times we were still getting money from America. With that money Sonya bought a ticket. Sid also got money, and they left on the train. They travelled through Japan. Sid and Sonya were in Japan. It took them about 5 months to get there.

But it took us two years. So we came to Moscow - Mother, Shy, and myself. The others, the ten families, were also there, and none of us could get away. I was the first one to get a visa. I used to go every day, trying to get a pass to get out of there. I went in there; there were a few Jews sitting and writing. A Jew you could recognize. I looked at one I thought was Jewish, so I said something to him in Yiddish and saw that he understood what I said. Then I spoke to him in Russian, told him we were left all alone, the whole whole story, how it happened and what happened, that we're alone and we want to get across, and all I have is this paper. That, he said, you can throw it away, that's nothing. But at least, I know their names, I said, and that's something. OK, he said, and wrote something on the paper. He said - if you can get into the Vecheka, try to see Madam Rabek. Go and see Madam Rabek. (I still remember the name!)