41
WHEN WAS PA IN Saskatchewan? That was before-I knew him. Zaide Froim's
brother Moishe, from Minneapolis. was in the hotel business. He had a
hotel in Estavan, and he _ took Pa into the business. Pa used to work
harder than the Uncle, who was an old man by then. How did they come by a
hotel? Grandfather, - always Grandfather. He put up the money together

with Moishe, and put Pa in asa partner. By the time I knew him, he

 

already had the store on Higgins Ave., also one of Grandfathers's
properties. He couldn't get along with the Uncle, so he looked for a
business for himself, and got the place when a tenant moved out. He made

a store out of the living room. After we married and moved in, there were
3 rooms; upstairs a bedroom, and dining roomd, with the kitchen

downstairs. We used to pay him $25 rent a month.

The wholesalers supplied us with goods, because he was Cohen's son.
Business was good, and he paid his bills. THey supplies him with whatever

he wanted, on his own name now, not on Grandfather's.

Then Alec came and asked Pa to sign for him. He would trave into the
country and sell cigarettes. And he signed. It was his brother, after
all. Zaide was like that, and so was your Pa. When I go married, I was
sick. I coughed and had difficulty breathing. The doctor said a fur coat
would make it easier for me. Grandfather wouldn't buy me a coat because

Rivke didn't have one, so he bought us both a cloth coat. A coat at that
time cost about $300. He wouldn't by a coat for Vera, because he said she

should go to work. He didn't know, nor did any of us, that she was deathly
ill.

That's when Pa said he wanted no part of Grandfather's inheritance. He
knew that his father had money, and If he could treat his one and only
daughter that way, then he wanted nothing to do with the inheritance.
That's why he was always angry with his father.

But when it came to the house, I mixed in. All the houses, Grandfather's
houses, were on my name. He. believed in me more than in Rivke; he was
afraid that if he put them in her name, he would ultimately have
He even would come to me for advice.

nothing.
