28.

to it that we had good food - we travelled first class. But it took a long time, about 3-4 years. Even after I got married I would get dizzy, and hold onto the sink.

Then I went to school, and I finished public school. But I couldn't talk.

Was it a special school?

A special school, just for greene. There was Shirley Cohen's mother, and about another 25 girls and boys. We spoke Russian amongst ourselves. The teacher knew Russian, but we knew no English. But I could write, so the teacher would say to me - Ray, how could you write a paper without being able to talk? Why don't you say it, talk to me. I was afraid to commit myself, that was the trouble. But when I came to the store, then I had to talk, because they were all English people around there, and there was nobody there I could speak Jewish to - or Russian. So I had to start talking. And Esther used to say when she found something I didn't know. Ma, what does it mean? I don't know. What do you mean you don't know? How can a mother not know?

When I finally learned, I spoke a good English. I didn't have an accent when I left Higgins Ave., but we moved into the Jewish district, and that killed my accent. When the women talked to me, I would mimic them, like Esther does, and it stuck with me. The last store finished me off completely. On Sherbrooke St. I was not bad. It's not good to mimic; you mimic so long until you're finally stuck with it.

How did I meet your father? Abie had a match for your father. Abie wanted to be a matchmaker to make a few dollars. He knew that with someone like your father - someone who had a store, a business, the bride's family would pay well. So he brought Jake and the woman to his house, and he was to take her to a movie. I didn't know that he had someone there. I was green myself, with no friends, but I had Sonya, so I went to see her. I came in and saw a man and a woman. The man asked Abie, in Yiddish, who is this? And Abie introduced me, his recently arrived cousin. Why be in a hurry, you can sit with us too, said the man. Should I have run away? So I stayed for a while and then left. Then your father said he didn't want to go to a show that night, maybe some other time. Later he called Abie and said that he preferred me. Abie thought he would earn a few dollars. He
wouldn't take anything from me, but he was sure your father would pay him