31.

if you have so many chickens, maybe you'll send us one? Then he came into the house and recites - Pini has a Nippi (laughter). There goes Pini, wearing a Nippi with nie. And the ni is clucking like a hen. We never did see the nie. Sherman always had something to say, and we laughed, from pain.

And Mother would take a bag and go to get bread. Bread was baked on Tuesdays and Fridays. The two of us would sit on the oven and sing. Hungry, but we sang. Mother went to the Shochet where Aunt Chaya Feige lived. She went into the backyard to the shochet's wife to ask for some bread, so she cut off two or three pieces of freshly baked chaleh for her. Just as Mother went out of the house, the door opposite opened and Auntie came out. When she saw Mother, she immediately closed the door. Sisters. She said she had nothing to do with her sisters, and didn't want to know about them. But my mother took care of all of them.

When the oldest one got married, Father took Mother's gold necklace and hocked it. He paid the 50 ruble he got as a dowry to the groom. Before the Chupa, the groom said he had no money for a suit, so father loaned more money, and bought him a suit. It was a great wedding. It was a small
town, and everybody was there. When Father paid off the necklace, he had to buy the husband a machine for making socks, so he went to another town and bought a machine. She made socks and sold them. Father didn't take any money from them. Meanwhile, the other sister came of marriageable age. She too needed a dress, a dowry, so father hocked the necklace once more, and married her off, too. And when she got sick, she came to Mother for help.

And Mother sent me, by wagon, to take care of her. How old was I at the time? 10 years old. I remember arriving there, she lived in one room, and cooked together with the landlady. She had kidney trouble, but wouldn't go to see a doctor. She eventually came over here, but died soon after, leaving two children.

Whenever something had to be done, Mother sent me. I was the apple of her eye, you should understand. She thought she wasn't able to give birth to a girl, so she made a deal with the Aunt. If the Aunt had a boy, and