37
it for him, and he would make barrels, pails, all sorts of items. You
remember the pails with herring in Winnipeg? If it wasn't herring in a
barrel, it was herring ina pail. If it wasn't pails, it was bathtubs.
Everything was made from wood then. He made a good living; he wasn't

rich, but he made a nice living.

But he had a horse and wagon? I was talking about the old country. Here
in Winnipeg, after they lost the money, he became a peddlar. He had _ to
make a living. For one thing, he grew older, and had to retire. Mother

was also of pension age when she arrived, and they got $20 a month

together.

When they lost the business, Isaac left for the States. Morry became a
lawyer, or something. He did all sorts of things, a money collector, like
a lawyer, until he left for Philadelphia too, like Isaac. But he came

back and married here, some sort of strange woman, Then he left again for
the States. There he worked for a factory that sold their product on _ the
instalment plan. He did the books, and he collected the payments.

The woman in Winnipeg? I heard that she died. She was an elderly woman.
Why he got involved with her I don't know. Maybe because he was "green",
maybe he studied with her - she was a very educated person, but elderly. I
don't know why. Sonya said she once saw the grave of a Mrs. Ghan at _ the

cemetery. She always called herself Mrs. Ghan.

So that's the way it was; the Aunts husbands were in the States. Mime
Esther lived there until he died. The oldest son, Moishe, named after my
grandfather. came to visit us once. He lived in Philadelphia, married,
and had children. Whatever happened to him, I don't’ know. Maybe they

went to Buonos Aires.

Lets start from the beginning. It seems as though mother had a third

sister, I'm not sure. Probably from the first wife. Where could Barushka
have come from? She was mother's neice. I was 18 years old, after a
sickness, and I went to her wedding. My head had been shorn, so I wore a

big hat to hide it. Her brother got leave from the Army to come to the
wedding.
