38
Brushke eventually left with her husband and a_ child. The
French, or maybe Spanish when they visited us. We couldn't tell.
seemed like a Frenchman - anyway, a Jew. She had a boy either the first or
a number of girls, and finally another boy. She had a

child spoke
To me he

second child,
Becky, and a Rochel (we were named after grandmother), and a Moishe. Those

kind of names. They were a lovely family, and now nobody knows where tat
has become of them. While we lived on Robert St., there was a_ visitor
from there to the family who lived accross from us. I actually went in
there and showed her the picture. She said she did not recognize the

picture, but did I have a name? Maybe if I had remembered his name, she

might have known him. Who knows.

Isaac met Elka in Philadelphia. She came from Poland to be with a sister,
two sisters I believe. She was probably already no baby, so her’ sisters
looked for a match for her. Walking by, Isaac saw her sitting on the
verandah, and said that she would be his wife. I don't know how they met.

Elka used to tell the story that he would come holding his hat, not

knowing where to put it, so he just stood and held it. SHe always’ told

that story.
He returned to Winnipeg; he was there when we arrived. At that time, Mary

was 6 months old and Sylvia about 2 1/2. They were both born in the
States, and Chavele and Boomie in Winnipeg.

Morry married Clara in Chicago, and Sid married Esther from western

CAnada. Sid was a young man. He had a store in the _ country. He had a
group of friends who knew the Hoffers, and they arranged the meeting with

Esther. He had prettier girls, but I guess she was the destined one.

TELL ME ABOUT ROSES'S FAMILY The story Rose told me. I was already
married when they came to live with Ma. They lived in the country. Their
‘father came alone. He didn't want to have anything to do with his wife and

children. He married a non-Jew, a German. Rose's mother died on the way

over. There was no family connection whatsoever. Ma took them in because
they were orphans. Sherman left for Brantford, so Sid was the only one
who lived home at the time. Mother had 3 bedrooms there, so the girls
had a room for themselves. Sara must have been about 18 or 19, and Rose

about 16. Their brother Jack was also there for a short while. He left to

someplace or other, and I didn't hear from him again until he married.
