25.

special for those who came in from the villages and wanted to learn. Anybody who wanted to could learn. They went in the evening, but I learned during the day. There were those who completed the course, and since there were no higher grades in Korsun, they went to gemnazium. She was one of them.

In Korsun there was only up to 6th grade. I was in the fourth when the bandits came, and that was the end of my schooling. No one else in the family went to school. Both Isaac and Moishe knew what they knew from the Heder. Isaac used to work very hard, but Moishe was a better student. Sherman learned from me. He was always with me, and knew before I did what was going on. If I had to learn something by heart for school, by the time I had read it through, he already knew it. I used to study at night. If I got up in the middle of the night and studied for an hour in bed, then go to sleep, when I woke up in the morning I would know everything. But not otherwise.

You used to tell us that when we studied when we were kids.

Do you remember? Go to sleep, and in the morning you'll know it. That's what I used to do. He would say to me: Let me hear if you know it. You made a mistake, it's not right. He knew everything - he didn't have to go to school. It was the same with Arithmetic. I would sit and calculate, add, subtract, and he would sit there - you remember - as
if he was asleep, and 5 minutes later, if he heard that I made a mistake, he would stop me. It's not right, it's got to be like this. Go over it again and you'll see that you made a mistake. Every song he knew. Whenever I had to read a poem in school, I read it once, and he knew it right off.

When he was among the soldiers, and they asked him how come he knew such good Russian, he said - You don't have to go to school to know how to talk, I have ears, and I listen. They wanted to send him to Moscow. Where there was a bright child, they would take him away from the parents to teach them. The parents had nothing to do with them then. But that was after the revolution, in Moscow and Petrograd. The idea was that the children should not be aware of the earlier times;