21

told us - it's her place, her home, but the kids all left and went away
and she was left all alone. We statp/there for a little while, not very

Then the Cossacks came in. After they came in they killed what

long.
walking down

was in sight. They shot from both sides, and young kids

the street were killed.
They came into our place and I didn't have sense enough to say the old
thing but it

women should go with them. They wanted to see the whole
They went

was locked, so I had to go and open up so they could go in.
everything, our cushions and whatever - we didn't
They tore the

Mattresses,

in there, tore up
have anything, just the cushions that we had with us.

place to pieces and whatever was in it they burnt up.

letters from Canada, it was all burnt up. But luck was,
the address on one of the letters. The other side was in Rmssian -
could see it read "Shtandard" Cooperage. That's how they got my

letters,- I wrote Shtandard, and they read it Standard. Otherwise they
Everybody sent a letter to the

I remembered
I

wouldn't have known where we were.
paper, and that's how my father got it, from the Forwards he got it.

Ya, so where was I ? ya, so they came into
Yes, he

Go back to where you were.
the house. They started to ask for money and for firearms.
I have one - a rifle. All right, give me the rifle. He

(Shya) said,
to drag me,

took ahold of him by the arm, and he said you don't have
I"ll give it to you. He crawled under the couch and he took out a
rifle, he made himself a rifle from wood. He made it with a _ knife,
blinder as he was, and he showed them the rifle. They gave him afew
cents for the rifle. They thought it was very smart. The next time, a
couple of hours later, another bandit came in. Sherman was sitting and

playing on the violin. played them afew pieces on the violin and _ they

left us.
But one time, I and mother were alone in the house. When we saw them

coming through the front door, we ran out through the back. We hid in
the grass. Sherman didn't want to go. He said they wouldn't touch
him. You go, and I"1ll stay here. He was left with three-four men, who
were stood up to be shot. Sherman saw that the rifle was sticking in
