24

everybody could go to school, so I registered, too.

But what did you do before that? Before that, I forgot to tell you. In

 

Oshana. Father worked for the (pritsim), the important ones, the
teachers, a doctor. When they would put up watermelons, pickles, and
Whoever

so on, to sour, they used to call him. They liked my father.
he wants to send to school, they'll take in. I was the one they could

send to school, because the boys worked with my father. They didn't go

to the regular school, they went to Cheder. Moishe went to CHeder and

he knew more than those who went to school. Isaac too, but he wasn't as
good a student. Before you could’ turn around, Moishe already knew
everything. The Rebbe came to see my father; if Moishe would only want
to, he could become a great Rabbi. But Moishe did NOT want. He read
the material once and knew better than all the others. He said he knew
it all, and didn't want to sit and learn with the others kids.

When he used to travel from one town to another, and there were some
old men on the wagon who spoke Hebrew, he would mix in. He would give
them a speech and an entire page of the GEmorrah by heart. He was
something else. But he didn't go to school - I went to school.

I was in grade 5, and had to write exams. When do you write exams? On
Shabbat. The Rabbbi's daughter was a classmate of mine. He was a great
Rabbi, and he wanted his daughter to be educated as well. I told him
that my father wouldn't let me go on Shabat - it was not allowed.. He
said - if you want to go, don't ask your father and go. I understood
what he meant. If you askd, then it is not permitted; if you don't ask,
do what you think is right. So, on Shabbes, we had to write exams, and
I told my father that I wanted to do what the Rabbi's daughter will do.
He said that if the Rabbi lets her go, then I can go too. And that's
how it was. We went together, and we both passed. THe few other Jewish

kids had to stop because they wouldn't write on Shabat.

I went to school till the fourth grade. Then the bandits came in, and
no more teaching, no more school. By the way, you remember when I came
to Israel by boat and met the insurance man and his wife? She took
courses, which means that she went to school in the evening. It was
