9.

I don't have to. If I want to, I can give you a visa, he said. He held us up a whole year. If you're not giving me the visa this time, I said, I'm bringing my mother and my brother here, and do whatever you want. You can feed us. You can see my position - how I am. And my mother, she's barefooted too, like I am, and if you don't want, you feed us. And I left. When I got home and they saw me, those that travelled with us, they asked - Where did you get those papers? There was one that had returned, had an affidavit from the States; she didn't have to wait, but she didn't know. She said she had some papers from America. Give me the papers, I said, and we'll see what you have there. A man who was standing nearby said he could read English. I recognized the stamp. It
was like the one we had from Sherman. I went with her and worked everything out for her. She left before me. She was travelling with three other girls. I believe one of them was American born, and that's why she had the paper. She had a child there, and so they couldn't keep her. They left. We all exchanged addresses, so that we could stay in contact with each other when necessary.

And that's the address my father found in the newspapers from New York – no, sorry, he saw it in the Yiddish paper. He used to read the Forwards. She placed the notice in the Forwards. "Anybody knowing the whereabouts of” - she didn't know if he was in Canada or where. When Pa saw it, he called all the kids together, and told them that Mother was in Moscow. By that time, we were in Petrograd.

And did you get the papers you needed in Latvia?

Sure. I said to him - why are you sitting here? I'm here for the people that want to go to Latvia. That's what I want. I don't want anything from you, I'm not going to stay in Latvia. I'm going past Latvia - just let me in through Latvia. You've got to give me that, that's what you're here for. If you don't give it to me, I said, you're an anti-Semite. It's because I'm Jewish, thats why you don't want to give me a visa. If you don't, I'll bring you the family. So he did - To get rid of you I'll give you the visa.

And what to do now? How do we move from here? We get to the border, and

How did you get to Petrograd from there?
