44.

And then Pa died, one-two-three. They killed him. My doctor said so. When I had to have the operation on the fallen womb - they told me it could be done then, but possibly not later on - Esther asked if it meant putting me under anaesthetic. When she was told yes, she refused to hear of it. The doctor asked why, and was told about Pa bleeding to death during a prostate operation. The doctor said that they must have given him the wrong anaesthetic, and that's simply what killed him.

I had been with him the night before the operation, and asked how he felt. "If I feel tomorrow like I feel now, everything will be alright." When I came in the morning, they told me he was dead. I said that they must have done something wrong, but they said he must have had something in his stomach, and he bled to death. That was the story.

The doctor told me there was a contraption that could be inserted to hold up the bladder, but I would have to learn to put it in and take it out myself. So I have this "thing" that holds up my bladder, otherwise I lose everything. What a story.

After your father died, I rented the store to the couple from Kensington. They paid $150 a month rent, and that I had to live on. I managed on less than that, so I was able to save as well. After we sold the building, I gave the $15,000 to the boys to invest in their business. I didn't have sense enough to buy shares for that amount. I rented a place for $100 a month, and didn't take into account that they would raise the rent. I thought $100 would be enough, but Sam said I wouldn't be able to manage on that. So they sent me $250 every month, and I was able to save money. I gave Esther $5,000 for a kitchen when they built their home. She needed a stove, and I was able to help with that. I also was registered as being a couple of years older, so I started getting my pension two years early. I was able to live on the pension.

When I told them that my rent was raised, each boy gave a $1,000 and sent me a check for $6,000. They did this a few times. Two years ago, they did it again. With that money I purchased the bonds. I'm not saying they didn't help me; they helped me a great deal. But if I had had the sense, the shares would have provided much more. Who knew at that time. $250 was a lot of money - 20%. No bank would have given me such a return.