19
her crazy son. The other son, she said, made a mess of the whole
house. He messed up the walls and the furniture. I take a look and I
see a little table standing in the corner. Actually, it was a picture
of a table, and on the table was a live chicken. You could actually
see the chicken breathing. My son, she said, no sooner did I bring the
chicken into the house, and it lay breathing with its tongue hanging
out, than he painted it just as it was.
"You realize that we met in Moscow", he said. I didn't remember, but he
spoke of Korsun as I knew it. They wouldn't let him into Moscow, but
he went there to paint the Czar's palace. He made a plan of the
building and he painted everyone there. He became very rich, but} they
took it all away from him, everything. When I saw him there, I didn't
know who he was, so I didn't recognize him. But as we talked, he asked
where I was’ from, and I told him - from Korsun. Did you ever hear of
Yente, the blacksmith's wife? When I told him we used to live there,
he told me who he was.
And you are selling cigarettes here? Here in Moscow, he said, I and
thousands of others are all peasants. We are nothing.
We went into a house they told us we could live in. It's true there was
a toilet, but neither the blumbing nor the electricity worked. There
was only and empty room. We slept on the floor.
We came into one place, - there was a lady there, and I understood that
she was one of the rich ones - George Borman's daughter. George Borman
was one of the wealthy ones, he made cocoa - Borman's Cocoa. They lived
in Moscow. The house was very tall, with beautiful roooms, but no
furniture. They had ruined everythign{ like after a progrom. Nothing
was left, only the frame of the building. The Jewish factories, all of
them were broken up to pieces. There wasn't one left.
The lady told me to clean up the place, and she would give me bread;
she had no money. A big ladder was brought in, Ma stood and held the
ladder, and I climbed up and washed the room. My God, what I went
through! It's impossible to tell you everything.

Afterwards, in Perograd, we were housed in the Barracks, in section
