18

home and I didn't know how to start. How do I make a_ beginning. So
Sherman was beside me and he said - so make a finish. And you think I
didn’t? I made a finish. Where there was supposed to be a cross, I

made a bendele, and started working from there. I understood that here
I had to darfn aropgein mit a shpitz, un ich bob gekrift un dcgekrift,
un ich hob geton azoi vi er hot gehaisn. Understand? How do I start to
"make it? My mother used to say that she used to make all kinds of
things, but to tell me how, she couldn't. She didn't work for years and
years, so she forgot. And I fought with her like anything. How could
you forget? If you knew how to do it - unless you didn't know how

How can you forget? Now I know only too well how one can forget.

I didn't forget yet, mind you, but I can't work it. I tried to make a
little hat for the baby - you remeber the hats I used to make? You
don't remember. You had a hat like that, and Larry, and Zelda had a hat
like that. I made for everybody. Suits and everything. But she said
she forgot how to start. She can't show me how to start. So at the
finish I started.

I used to work and make $7 a week. 7 Ruble. And with this $7 a _ week
we had enough to live on. And I bought myself clothes. I remember the
first blouse I got. I paid about $3 for the blouse. Mother was mad like
anything. Three Kerbl you spent on a blouse? How could you! And I
worked like that for a long time. Until the revolution came.

In the revolution they took everything away and the stores were closed.
EVerything was closed. The fellow I got the wool from in the _ first
place- they broke up the store, they had to move away, they took away
everything that they had, and they went away to Moscow. They were very
rich. They managed to get away with money, but everything was broken
up. The fellow that came back, there was a woman - the husband who
made wheels - she had two sons. One was a fardoznik(?) a painter of
pictures. He used to do some wonderful things - and one was a_ scuptor.
And when I came in there, I saw her, the old woman, her name was Yonte-
sits on the table. It was a sculpture. I said, Yonte it looks like
you. She said - My crazy son, he made me out of clay. She called him
