43.

Why was Albert angry with you?

Sam once asked me that. He came to us for a $300 loan to buy goods to travel with. I told him that we couldn't, we didn't have the money. But Pa said he would sign. By that time, we were in debt ourselves to all the wholesalers. The chain stores opened up in the area, and took all our customers. So I said if he doesn't pay it back, you will have to pay it. And that's the way it was. And Spivak (lawyer) made an arrangement for paying out debts to the wholesalers. $300 we paid the wholesalers. I was holding Isaac's money, and paid some of the debt from that. And I borrowed $300 on my father's life insurance policy. They didn't reclaim our house because it was on my name. We were finally able to sell the house for $9,000, and with the $3,000 we got for the groceries, we were able to breathe.

When we came to Toronto, we found this place, and I knew right away we would never make a living here. Shabbat and holidays he closed up, so all the customers went to the store on the opposite corner. He made a good living, and we could hardly manage to earn enough for food. We bought the building for $11,000, but paid only $300 in cash. The rest was mortgage.

Wherever we looked, nothing suited your father, but he liked this place. It was in a terrible state. We had to fix the ceiling, the cellar, and bring electricity and water to the third floor. We were able to rent out the apartment on the third floor, to Ann and Joe Hoffman.

Finally, we were able to sell the property to the City, as a playground. I couldn't get $11,000 when I tried to sell, but now they paid us $33,000.

That's why we were lucky and it turned out so well.

We rented the store just before you left for Israel, about 1952. They were two families of Russian immigrants who had left Israel and came to Toronto. They worked hard, and then moved out to a bigger business. Then we rented to an old couple, and they bought the inventory. They had had a business in Kensington. Being older, and the children gone, they wanted to live in a Jewish district. The old man died in his sleep one night; he was only about 70. She had no reason to stay on, so she sold to a non-Jew. The wife was a horror, an anti-semite. They would bang on the windows and yell, something awful. It was impossible. That's when we tried to sell.