22

the front of him. He took hold of the rilfe and pulled it down, so it

hit one of the men in the foot, and they ran away. They were afraid if

someone heard a shot, somebody else would come in and they would shoot

him. The Cossacks themselves were afraid of evrybody else.

if Sherman hadn't run outside and bang on

(When it happened with me,
the window

the window, they wouldn't have let me go yet. He banged on

and broke the glass, so they thought someone else was coming and they

ran away.)

That's how it happened, they hit one in the foot and they ran away. If

for Sherman they would have killed him there. They asked him - How
that.

not
did you do that? He said, I have nothing to lose. He always said
or he told them a story, and that's how he
have been

He sang a Russian _ song,
always got out. He was smart, even as a lttle boy. He must

about 5-6 years old.
When we went away he was 7. When Morry was home, he bought a Mandolin.

He was afraid Sherman would break it, so he put it up near the ceiling,
and he went away. What did SHerman do? Ray, where is the Mandolin. I
was afraid to tell him where it is. I said - I don't know, Morry put it
away someplace. He took the broom and went around the room with it. He
banged on on the table, and the Mandolin sounded. So he put a chair on
the table, got from the table to the chair, and took down the mandolin.
By the time Morry came home he could play 3 tunes on it. And then he
showed Morry how to play it. "Watch how I hold my fingers, one here
and one there." He later got a Balalaika, which is played ina
different way. The mandolin you play with a_ pick. Shy didn't have a
pick, so he played with his fingers. When Morry saw that he could play

it, he got him a pick. The Balalaika is played without a pick. He
played everything.

When Morry came to pick us up in Riga, he bought him a guitar . When
the doctors examined him in London, he had a guitar. The guitar was
easy for him. They wanted him to play for them, so he did, and they
