39
Friends of Rose's mother in Russia thought that if they brought over the
children, the father would care for them, but the wife would have none of

it. But he did help Rose. She worked for him in his store, a grocery
store. He was very well off. He already had a new family, a son and_ two
daughters. Sara went to work ina shop, and earned enough to pay for

board and room. Rose was worked very hard, and when she had had _ enough,
she and Sara looked for a place to move in together.

When my mother hear the story about the orphans who were left alone, she
said - What, orphans and no one to care for them? And she took them in.
Sara was married in our house, and Rose, of course, went off to Toronto to
marry Sherman. They were married alone; none of us were there.

Rose came for Pesach to us when she was pregnant with Lionel. She was
angry at Sid's Esther because she went to her cousin, who was married to a
non-Jew. How could she do that, when Father had just come from the
hospital after and operation; who knows if he would live to see another
Pesach, and she goes off to a cousin? Rose was always angry at her for

that. Lionel was named after my father.

Now where was I? Rose and Sherman, yes. When the girls moved in, SHerman
was in school. When he came home, she would take him wherever he had to
go. She was always with him after work. She was jealous of other girls.
There was the Shoichet's daughter, a teacher, who would come and read for
him. Fissel, or Hin, he called her. Rose had boyfriends too, but she
wanted Sherman. After they went to Toronto, Sonya wrote me that they did
not marry, but were living together. Both Abie and Sonya told me that,

but Sherman said they were married. HERSEK REKERRERESEE EES

When I sold the business, I went down to Winnipeg, and I left $15,000 with
the Cohen boys. I have a will there, with the money to be left to the
grandchildren in case anything happens to me. That's all, only for the
grandchildren.

I have at Paul's place $11,000 in bonds - 7 and 4. $9,000 in
certificates, and $10,000 for a 3 year period. $16,000.

Ephraim Cohen (father of Jacob, father-in-law of Rachel)
He knew nothing, he couldn't read. He couldn't even write Yiddish
