aero

14

Tt was a small town, about 50-60 families. My mother and my father were
born - Father was from Uman and mother was from Tolna. They got married
in Tolna, and when they got married they moved to Oshana. My father
worked there, he had a little factory. He had about 4-5 people working
for him. He used to go to the forest, bring wood, and bring them home
and make barrels. But my mother had two sisters and two brothers from

a second marriage. She died early, and the kids were left alone.
Mother was the oldest of the family. She took the two girls with her,
and also the two boys. The boys worked with my father. She had
another sister, and after she married she came also to Oshana. But she
didn't want to know about the other kids. They were not herg sisters
and brothers and she didn't want anything to do with them- she didn't
want to know about them. Mother kept the two girls in the house.
Whatever out children did, they did too. Until they got married. The
Mima Mania was married before, but she lived in Uman after she got
married. She didn't live in our town. And the other one lived in
Shpola. Also a little town. And she lived there until she had her first
and second baby. And then they heard that we were going to go to
America, they came to say gooodbye to us. And my mother at the same
time sold both houses. For that money that she sold the houses she
said she would take her sister with her. The younger one, because the
younger one was sick. And Manya’s (the older one) husband went away
when we were turned back. Because he went with us. So she thought she
would wait until he sends her money and go by herself. And this, she
took the whole family, Fetter Yosel un zi and the two kids - I remember
we walked the border, we didn't go by pass, so we had to steal into
Germany - to Islovits. I carried on my back the little gir! because
she was too small - we walked in water. The little boy was already 5
years old, so he went with Moishe and the others carried his up and
they walked through. THis meant that when we were turned beck her
Sisters went to America, and we came back.

What was the house like? THe house was one big room - it was called a

stolero - a big room, everybody slept in that room. There was one

oem U IR ste. - ee
