30

 

came before, and what came after. Will you be able to put it all
together?
That was before the pogrom, before the kozaks came. After that, no one

could escape. But there were those who knew. Near us was a little town
called Stablov. There, all the young boys got together and got hold of
arms. They stood at the entrance to town, and didn't let them in. As soon
as they heard them approaching, they started shooting, and they ran away. .
After that, they put bands on their arms, and it was known that they
were those who were taking care of the city. Nobody touched them. Even
when they came into our town, at the beginning, they brought some food and
some medicine into the houses, and treated the wounded. They were Jewish
boys, they took care of the city, and nobobdy touched them.

My Uncle took his’ three girls and went to that town. By the time he
returned, things were quieter. Those Bandkits left, and others came in.
These were different, they didn't go killing from house to house. But even
so, when it suited them, they would start shooting in the streets. Whoever

Passed would be shot.

THat's when he came back. If he would have come and said, come with
us....People travelled by wagon there, so one more would have gotten on
the wagon, so what? But they weren't like my mother. Whatever affected
the sisters, affected her. If a sister had a row with a husband, she ran
to us, and remained until he came to get her. We remained behind, and she
had everything. He worked and made a living. We didn't have anything -
she knew we didn't have a piece of bread in the house. She never came down
or sent anybody to bring something. She knew that we were all sick, and
she didn't send anybody down. Once Sherman wrote a song about it.

She had one son. He wasn't very bright, but he was a nice boy. He used to
come to friends. When the girls came, they would come to us. There was a
youg girl - Sonya's sister used to go with her. So she Came and she
invited her Purim for homentashn. | Sherman sits in the kitchen and hears
everything. You should come, he said. Mother is making homentashen and
we'll have lots of fun. She left, and he ran after her. "Sorkele, maybe
you'll bring me a homentash? "Mother didn't say I could, but we have many

chickens, with alot of fat, and we'll make a big party." So Sherman said,
