10.
are turned back, with the paper and everything. And then I got a

letter from Canada.
On the platforms- from one place to the other. It took months to get

from Moscow to Petrograd. THe whole trip should take about 2 hours
travel time; it took us about 3-4 weeks.

There, I sold apples. We had to eat, too. My God, it's a long story!
And then they caught me with the apples. We were ready to leave, had

all the papers, everything was fine. I still had afew apples to sell
at the market, although selling was forbidden. I'm caught and taken to
jail. Soldiers are standing there. I had, I guess, about 6-7 apple

with me, and I said - Boys, have an apple. By the time I came into the
jail, I had an empty basket; no more apples. The first man inside asked
me why I was brought in. I don't know, I said. I was walking in the
market, looking for something to buy, when they picked me up. They
picked you up with and empty basket, he laughed?

Of course, the soldiers were hungry, so they ate. I knew there would be
no apples left, so why arrest me? The jail was full. On the walls was

written "smiet, hebreyen speculantn" (Death to Jewish speculators).

I, of course, am a _Yidisher speculant. I'm inside, locked in, and
Mother is’ left outside. Once inside, the others told me - Sit down,
make yourself comfortable, you'll be here a long time. ANd I said, no,
we have to leave here. This one say she's been here 6 months, another
a year. And why is she there? Who knows? They probably caught her
with a bun or something. Why is she sitting such a long time? Because
you have to send in a prozini - explaining why she was apprehended,
what crime she committed. And that can take years! But I said, I've
got to go, I can't sit here. I have travel papers; I've been onthe
move for 2 years. I'm supposed to leave tomorrow.

All right, we'll see waht will be. Meanwhile, a soldier comes in and
asks who is ready to clean the office. Right away, I said I would. He
took a look at me, and said - you? You won't be able to pick up the
