29

handsomely. But your father refused to pay. He said I was Abie's cousin,
and anyway he brought another woman to the meeting. Abie was angry - he
didn't want to come to the wedding.You know how Abie was.

But that doesn't sound like Pa, I would have expected him to pay! No. A
cousin? He should be paid only when he makes the match. I entered’ the
room, he saw me, and that was that! He didn't take me to a show, he didn't
take me anywhere. Afterwards he called me at home, and asked if T was’
home. That's all he had to know. )

He came one time, and I said I didn't want to go anywhere, and I didn't
gO. Sometime later, I went for a walk with Sonya - Zelda was in the
carriage- near Higgins Ave. I'm not sure that Sonya didn't go that way on
Purpose, probably she did. Let's go in and have a Coca Cola. It was Pa's
store. He saw us come in, gave us drinks and made a whole picnic there.
T'1l come down to see you, Rachel. He came afew times. T wanted him to
know my whole story. TIT could see that he was the kind that would want a
Kosher wife. Otherwise, it would be no good. And his mother? She would
have to come and inspect the sheets. So I figured it was best to tell
what had happened. I already had his ring, but I returned it, and told
him to think it over. I told you the whole story, and I never want to
hear of it again, T never want to be reminded of it by you.

He went away, and after about 3-4 days he called to say he wanted to see
me. It's all right, he doesn't care, and that's all. But he always made
me miserable because of it. Very miserable. And he made my life bitter. I
was foolish; I thought here it would be different. In the old country it
was like that. My mother said we should go to the Rabbi. He would give
me a "ksoreh" - what had happened to me. Then I would give it to the
Groom under the Chupa; he would know, and all would be well. But I didn't
want to go the Rabbi. I went to a doctor to be sure I didn't have an
infection. But he hurt me terribly. And don't think he didn't love me.
He loved me, but he had to dig at me.

It__wasn't only the dig. He didn't know how to handle the situation. He
was very jealous, and was hurt as well. If somebody said something to me:
in the store, it was terrible. Then I would remember what my mother-in-law
told me: Because of that God will give you good children. And he has.
That's the end of the nice story, my son. You'll have to rework it, what
