17
like baseball. I remember the first time Moishe and I went on a_ train.
When we came back, the whole town was in our yard. And Morry showed
them how the train ran on the rails. And you sit here and you didn't
even know that you were driving. There were people sitting there -

"It's like a house - you don't even feel that you're moving!

I was about 6 years old at the time that -happened. I was after a
sickness - we went to a wedding. That neice of my mothers was married

—,

at the time, and my head was shaved off, I had typhoid fever - or
whatever. Who knew what we had. I couldn't walk for months after that.
They cut my hair off with a razor, they shaved my hair off. So they
put a big hat on me I shouldn't go with a bare head. That's the way it
was.

Then as you know we came back to Korsun. We didn't go there on account
of we had Sonya's mother there, Sonya's family. Mother didn't want to
go because she didn't have anybody there. "My sister is here, so we'll
live here." We rented a house by ourselves. Korsun was about 5 times
as big as Oshana - also a big city! But it was considered a big town.

There were a couple of big drug stores, and quite afew doctors, and

there were very rich people. And I remember we used to go past,- a
piano was playing - and Sherman wouldn't leave. If he heard a piano,
he stayed there until they finished. It was a big town compared to the
one we lived in before. It was a very big city. We moved in there. We
lived with a family, the husband made wheels, - for wagons. And they

were very well to do. They had two rooms separate from their house - it
was like an attachment. It was empty when we rented it. And we paid $10
a month for 6 months. Father used to send us money. We used to get $50
every month - it was a lot of money. We saved up quite a bit. Until the
war broke out. When the war broke out and everything stopped, we
couldn't get anything. So I started to do my own work. I went into a
store and I asked them to give me wool and I'li make them croche'd
shawls. They used to sell to the peasant women little shawls that they
would wear under their big shawl. I went and I got that wool and I came
