15.

bedroom - father and mother slept in that bedroom. And whoever worked for my father, everybody slept in that room. But on different cots. The house was like this, a cot here, and a cot here, and a cot there.

At the side of the room.

Two boys slept on one place. The girls no - we had another place, it was just a kitchen and one room, so the girls slept in that room. When I was a little girl I also slept in that room. As a matter of fact, on Saturday mornings, the boys used to fight among themselves - Rochele, kim zu mir in bet. I was about 3-4 years old and everybody wanted me with him. But after when I got bigger, naturally, it was a different story. But we slept in one room, I on one cot, and Moishe and Sidney on another. That's how it was. When we sold, that's all I remember from that. Anything else I don't remember.

There was a stove?

Of course, there was a kitchen, and a stove. The ovens were built in. On top was a place where we could sleep. In the winter time, when it was cold, we used to sleep on top of the oven. Two kids could sleep there - it was called "ariber". You would put in wood or straw, make a fire and then close it up - there was a chimney on top - we used to close the chimney and the heat kept warm the whole house. When we were kids we used to sit near the wall, because it was hot.

What was the house built of?

THe house was built of wood, and with laime, like clay, with straw they used to mix - like bricks. And then they used to break it up and put on Kolach, like you have in your house
- whitewash, on the inside, and on the outside they put a little color in. The walls were the same thing on the inside and on the outside.

So it wasn't wood?

I guess wood was only the frame, and they filled it in with those bricks. And it was warm, it wasn't like big houses, it was warm inside. The roof was covered with straw, and whenever the roof started to leak through, they took off that piece and put on another piece of straw, in the rain and snow and everything. They laid them one on top of the other, like a tile, and the rain could not go through. It was all from the straw they took from the fields.
