5.

Ah, so before you started coming here, you live in Oshana?

Ya.

Was that also in the Ukraine?

Ya, in the Ukraine.

And when you went back you stayed in Korsun?

It's not far, about 25 miles from where we lived. Also a small town. And from Kiev it was overnight by train - not far from Kiev. So when the war started and we didn't have anything to show - no, wait, that was not the war, that was the revolution already. If it wasn't for the revolution, we wouldn't have been able to start out. We didn't have money; we didn't have anything to go by train with. When the revolution started, you could go any place. If the train ran, anyone could jump on and go. There were no bosses, no authority. Wherever there was a little band of soldiers, of bandits, so they started to run the train and you went wherever they wanted to go — the communists, sure, so they started to run the train. When we got on we rode for about 30 miles, and then it stopped. We were sitting on the platforms. It wasn't closed cars - the ones they run freight. We sat for about 10 days before they put another engine to it and they pulled us a little further. It took us a year to get to Moscow.

We got into Moscow. We didn't have anything and it was in December - very cold there - about 40 below. And I didn't have any shoes, and I made a pair from rags. With spools from cotton I made the heels. That's how I walked. We didn't have anything to eat so what could we do. So I went out to the market to see what I can try. So I bought some apples, and we were sitting near the barracks. We had a couch; the family had a couch. We were sleeping on that couch and eating on that couch. There were bandits in the barracks, not soldiers. But the Germans were still there. The Russians fought the Germans till they drove them out, and when they left, anybody who got hold of a gun became a big shot.

So we didn't have any papers. There was no place to go in and take a paper saying we were so many and who we were. So I made up a paper myself; Mother's age, my age, Shy's.
