34.

So, Mother and Mime Chaya Feige were from your grandfather's first wife, and all the rest from the second wife. Mother said they were her sisters and she took care of them. If one of them had an argument with her husband, she ran to Mother. She would stay two to three weeks, and then he would come to get her. Make up and go home.

Uncle left for America, after Isaac; and to Philadelphia, too. Mime Manye was left alone. He didn't have work: he was a painter. When Isaac sent money for Ma, he sent for her as well. He sent $10 for her, so she had $20, so she was able to manage the whole month. She stayed with us, didn't have to pay rent, and paid only for her food. Then there was Esther. When her husband left for America, she came to us with her two children. Manye's man was Uncle Yossl, and Esther's was also called Yossl. He left after Uncle Yossl.

No, I'm mistaken. They were girls when they came to Mother after their parents died. When my grandfather, Ma's father, and his wife, died, the children were left alone. Mime Chaya Feige didn't want to have anything to do with them, so Ma took the two sisters. Mayer, opened a little store for himself in the country. Laizer worked for father until he left for
America. (Here is the story of how Ma's father took care of the two girls weddings.)

It seemed to me that all his life Father was paying for the necklace; he'd take it out for a few weeks and then hock it again. When you opened up our closet, we had a closet like yours, you found a million Kapotes, expensive ones. But when someone approached Father, they needed money for Matzot, he said he had no use for so many Kapotes, why should they simply lay in the closet? - and he gave them away. Wouldn't they return them when they could afford it? If they had to go to Synagogue and they needed a Kappote, he supplied them. That's what he had Kappotes for.

Sonya's mother was my mother's sister. She got married, and was pregnant with Sonya. When Sonya was born, Aunt came to us. She had nothing to live on, so she became a wet nurse - at the Tolner Rabbi's He tried a number of them, but preferred her for the baby. When she left, Mother had
Moishe and nursed both him and Sonya. Manya was born exactly on the day