23.

talked to him. They said he was marvellous, and gave him a paper saying he's an exceptional child. He'll never get lost. And that's the way it was wherever we went and whatever happened. He always managed to get out of a tough situation with a story or a joke.

We moved to a different place. Here there was a man, must have been about 25-26, who always wanted Sherman around him. If anything happened, "bring me Sherman"; if Sherman will come, he will help.

There were Ukrainians boarding there, where we stayed. The man's mother had boarders. One of the boarders was a boy who came in from a little village to the city to go to school. But that's a whole story - the father of this man was a buyer of cattle. He always used to go to the country to buy cattle and all the men there knew him. But when they started to kill Jews, they killed him, too. Another two men were with him, and none of them came back. On the third day, they brought in the people - the dead people. There was was a convert there, a yiddisher man that had married a non-Jew many years before. He had married children by that time. When he heard that the 3 Jews had been killed, he went and stayed in the forest with the dead bodies to make sure that the wild animals wouldn't desecrate the bodies.

Before it started to get light, he brought them into town. They asked him, how did you do that? He said "if my boys had known, they would have killed me too. But they didn't know where he was; he said he was going to town. They would have killed their own father had they known where he was all night. He wanted them to have a Jewish burial.

What was school like?

School was all right at the beginning before the bandits came in. When the Bolshevicks were in power, it was all right. That was at the beginning of the revolution, with Kerensky, and that Jewish one they were after all the time, the one they killed - I forgot
his name. Why do I remember Kerensky? Because there were notes, money, with his name. He was the one that dethroned the Kaiser.

But what was I telling you? Oh yes, about school. At that time,