27.

They used to rebake the bread that was old and in crumbs, they used to rebake it. They put some butter into it, and whatever else, soften it up and bake it. That's the bread that I got. I came home and it was fine, and I even got some breadcrumbs too, in a bag. When we came home and put hot water on it, whatever came up on top - dirt - we used to take it off, and eat the soft crumbs. Because there was nothing to eat. I used to get a turnip, cut it in 3 pieces - this for breakfast, this for dinner, this for supper. Sherman used to get twice. Everything double portions. Because he was a child. He was sick, more at the hospital than at home. I used to slice off half my piece of bread and bring it to him to the hospital. Mother used to cut off from her piece and from mine, and take it to him. Then they started to sell in the street - how can I describe it like kreplach. They were bigger, some had rice in them, and some had potatoes. Sometimes, at the market, I used to catch them just as they were brought out fresh, I would pay a thousand ruble and buy a fresh Knish for him. I had so much paper money - carried it in a bag. You counted in the thousands. I would start counting from the end - 1000, 999, 998, and so on. That way I used to save a few ruble. He would get confused and say you've paid enough. Well - if you say so.

Later there were chocolates and candies, a thousand a piece. When there was a larger piece, I would cut some off and bring it to Sherman at the hospital. He would ask me - How big was the piece before you cut it?, And I would say, What's the difference, as long as you have some.

And that's how we lived. It was a miracle that we got here. That's why I said that if God will help me to bring Mother and Shy over, then my job will be done.

What did you do when you got to Winnipeg?

I didn't go to work, I couldn't go to work, I was sick. My teeth bothered me, I wheezed always, I couldn't talk, especially in the wintertime. I contracted Pleurisy in Moscow before we left. There were no medicines; you had to manage without. At night, in the dark, we were blind. Shaya used to lead us. Neither I nor Mother could see. When it started to get dark, we were absolutely blind. Sherman would hear us coming - Wait, I'll come down and bring you up. It was most likely because of the poor diet. On the ship, Morry saw