45

When Alec was alive, I used to go there, and I always came back with
money. Sam would look at me and say, Auntie Ray, you need another coat. I
told him I couldn't afford it, and he said he would pay. He sent me to
Holt Renfrew I should tell them he said for me to pick a good coat. When I
got there, they were waiting for me, asking if I was Sam's Aunt. I
should buy a coat because Sam sent me? So I bought a purse and a pair of
shoes I needed badly. When I came back, he said, what do you mean you
couldn't find a coat there. They came to me with a mink coat, and he
Said, why didn't you take it? He sent me back there with a check for .
$6,000. But I didn't need the coat, Esther needed it. I had a coat made
for me for $2,000, of the best mink. Now she's wearing it - it's about

12, 13 years old. I don't need it anymore.

Thank God, I have enough to live on. Whoever asked for a donation - I
never refused anyone. 2 bonds I had left I gave to the building fund; and
for the newcomers. One was for $360 - American money. So they got a

donation. Aside from the pension, there was a drop in property tax, and I
received a $500 deduction. I gave $25 for Israel, for the old folks’ home.

that kind of thing. I gave about $100 - $200.

When I moved in here, I paid $160 a month; now I pay $400. THis coming
August, it will go up again. At first they figured 6% a year, now it's
4%. For years they made no improvements; now they want to hire the rent

for improvements. These buildings belonged to the Steinbergs, but now
they sold them, and I don't know to whom they belong. If the rent goes up,
it goes up. What can I do? It's a good location. I can use a streetcar.
It's central. The apartment is nice. It's clean, even tho they only

painted twice in the 20 years I've been here; over 20 years. If it needs

painting, I'll paint it myself. Meanwhile, it doesn't need it.

I don't feel like going to Esther's. What will I do there. Here, even
the way I am, I get around. If it's nice outside, I go shopping, to the
bank. I do whatever I have to do. There I'll have to sit down she should
attend me. She can't; she's busy. I wouldn't let her look after me
anyhow. I was there when I was sick, and I coudn't get out of bed. I had

no other choice, so I was there. The minute I could crawl out of bed, I

walked, held onto the bannister, and walked down the Stairs.
