ll
pail. I weighed all of 80 pounds then. Never you mind, I said, I'll
pick up the pail all right. Nobody else offered to go and wash _ the
floors. I went into the office and saw that it was empty. But I see a
bunch of papers on the desk. What can we do with those papers? I also
sent in a prozeni - a request- . I looked through the pile and saw that
mine was on the bottom. I quickly turned over the pile, and lo and
behold, mine was now on the top!. And I remain sitting; no washing the
floor. Then the man came in and sat at the desk. He took a look at me,
and smiled. He understood that I was Jewish. So was he. He was a
commandant, an officer.
Why are you sitting, he askes me? Sure, I came here to clean, so why
am I sitting? What do you think, k asked him; do you think I am
capable of picking up this pates WHether you can or not, I'll help
you, and he carried the pale into the room I was’ supposed to mop. Do
the best you can.
Where is your prozeni? I sent it in yesterday. When were you brought
in? Yesterday. WHere is it? Must be on the desk. That's funny, you
only sent it in yesterday, and it's already on top of the pile. He
laughed. Why did they bring you in, you must have done something?
I was afraid to tell him about selling the apples; the punishment for
that was terrible. I said that I had afew apples with me, the boys were
hungry, so they ate them. And so, he said, when you came in, you had
nothing on you? THey saw nothing on you when you were brought in?
No, they saw only an empty basket. Then I told him that we were due to
leave the next day, and that my mother was waiting outside the prison.
I also told him about SHerman.
I'll give you the permit, and tomorrow you'll be free to go.That's how

I got out of there.
We get to the border, and back we go gain.

Back to Petrograd,. and to the office. They sent me where the soldiers
were, to the. barracks. Go back there and wait. They thought we're

coming back from America so they prepared a special dinner for us.
