20.

eleven. We were given a bed with nothing on it but boards, and told that this was ours. "That's yours. Whoever comes in will get another one for himself. This is yours." The three of us slept on it.

Soldiers going by used to buy an apple. It wasn't allowed, and if an officer came along, they had to hide the apple. And that's how we lived. They used to cook everything there, outside, in a big pot. Who knows what was in there; they would put in anything they could get their hands on. Either herring, or a horse that they brought in, even if it was green. When they brought in a bit of soup, it was green on top. We used to take it off and throw it away. When we caught a piece of meat, Sherman used to neigh like a horse. The soldiers would gather around Sherman - Sherman what have you got there? He would tell them stories and they would listen to whatever he told them.

Tell us about the pogrom when he played the violin.

The pogrom was in Korsun; after a fire. They burnt up the house where we lived. We lived with somebody else, it wasn't our house. The fire started in the middle of the night, and we had to run out into the middle of the street. About two or three houses further, there was one that wasn't burning, so we ran in there and we were there during the
night. They gave us another place, also one where the people had run away. Jewish fellows, they ran away. They had a few dollars, so they ran on. We couldn't run any place, so we were there. They, the goyim, gave us a place. They said they were poor like we were; they were good people. If they saw a rich place, they would take whatever they could, but in our case, there was nothing, so they gave us a place to stay. It was a beautiful home, but it was empty, without even a place to sleep. There was an old woman there, very rich, who sold flowers. They were all rich, but their children, the young people, used what money
they had and ran away, some to Kiev, some to Moscow. The old woman was left alone. She wouldn't move.

She said she wouldn't leave, so she was there when we came in. So she