42
When we moved in the place was a wreck. We paid rent, and painted and
fixed it up so that it looked like a palace. I said, this was the first
place we lived in, and it was ours.

When Grandfather died, Nate wanted me to sign all the property over to
him. He took after the Properties, and did the plumbing, and Grandfather
had left the Properties to him. I wrote everything over, but not this. I
told your father that he was also a son, and was. due something, but he
refused because of how his father had acted. I also think there was
something else, dating back to when Grandfather left Russia and nobody
heard from him. Your’ father knew something; Alec didn't. Alec didn't
need anything by then. The boys already worked in Calgary; Harry was in
the film exchange.

You know how Harry got to the film exchange? He was an excellent skater,
and a very handsome young man. While skating one day, he met the young
wife of the head of the film exchange. She wanted to learn how to skate,
and he taught her. She got him the job in the film exchange. Harry saw
to it that the other boys also got jobs.

Before the Exchange, Harry and Jack used to travel with Alec in the
country. If he managed to make sales, then the family could eat, and if
not, there was nothing to pay for the goods he had taken. So he came to
Pa, and Pa signed for him. Alec sold the house his father had given him
when he moved to Calgary. When we moved out of Higgins, I suggested that
your father talk to his father, maybe he would help us get a bigger place.
We had _ the one bedroom, which wasn't even big enough for a crib. Your
father and I and Esther, who was born by then, slept in the same bed. But
he would not hear of it, and that was that. But if I needed anything, I
would talk to Grandfather. ‘I once called him on the phone and told him I
was going to buy a watch, and he said, if you need a watch, go buy one and
I'll pay for it. What if it costs $25? So I bought it, and he paid for
it. When Pa heard about it, there was hell to pay. I told him it was none
of his business. Where Vera was concerned, he fought with GRandfather all

the time.
